---
version: 0.3.0
date: 2022-08-20
hex_url: https://hex.pm/packages/otpcl/0.3.0
---
# OTPCL Version 0.3.0: The Stringier The Better

It's been a long while since the last release, but OTPCL ain't dead
quite yet!

This release involves two major changes to how OTPCL works:

1. Support for "stringy" interpreters

2. A completely different way to define OTPCL commands

## What in tarnation is a "stringy" interpreter?

So by default, OTPCL's parser is "smart" about types; if it parses an
integer it'll emit an integer, if it parses a float it'll emit a
float, and if it parses an atom it'll emit an atom.  This is great for
a general-purpose(-ish) Erlang-compatible language, since it means
that if you want to call, say, `math:ceil/1`, you could do `use math;
math ceil 1.2` in OTPCL and you'd get a sensible `2.0`.  This is *not*
so great, however, in two situations:

1. You want to use OTPCL to parse user-provided config files or
   scripts, and you're worried about careless or outright malicious
   users uploading OTPCL configs/scripts that create lots of atoms and
   bring down the Erlang VM.
   
2. You want to use OTPCL to parse config files and want to avoid
   variants of the [Norway
   problem](https://hitchdev.com/strictyaml/why/implicit-typing-removed/)
   (namely: the "string or float?" example)

To address this, OTPCL 0.3.0 introduces a new "stringy" mode for the
interpreter.  Stringy interpreters, as the phrase might imply, don't
do any special parsing of "atomic" values (atoms, integers, or
floats), instead emitting them as (binary) strings.  This works
through a special variable (`$STRINGY_INTERPRETER`); if that's set,
then the interpreter is stringy.  For example, in an OTPCL script or REPL:

```tcl
import erlang
is_atom foo    # returns true
set STRINGY_INTERPRETER ok
is_atom foo    # returns false
unset STRINGY_INTERPRETER
is_atom foo    # returns true again
```

There's of course a helper function in the Erlang-facing API
(`otpcl_env:stringy_state/0`) that will generate such a state for you.
This starting state is based on `otpcl_env:core_state/0`, which only
includes the commands defined in `otpcl_core` (that is: `return` and
`|`) - meaning that scripts running with such a state won't be able to
break out of stringiness by calling `set STRINGY_INTERPRETER ok`,
since they won't have a `set` command at all by default.

The downside of stringiness is that there's no automatic conversion at
the moment when calling Erlang functions; all arguments passed are
strings, so any function such an interpreter calls must be prepared
for that, or else you're in for a bad time:

```
otpcl> set STRINGY_INTERPRETER ok
ok
otpcl> math ceil 1.2
error: badarg
Stacktrace:
  math:ceil/[<<"1.2">>]
    error_info: #{module => erl_stdlib_errors}
  otpcl_meta:'-fun2cmd/2-fun-0-'/4
    file: "/home/northrup/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_meta.erl"
    line: 212
  otpcl_eval:interpret/2
    file: "/home/northrup/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_eval.erl"
    line: 223
  otpcl_repl:eval/2
    file: "/home/northrup/Projects/otpcl/src/otpcl_repl.erl"
    line: 56
```

Also, since `stringy_state/1` is just `core_state/1` with
`$STRINGY_INTERPRETER` set to `ok`, it's up to you to build up (with
e.g. `otpcl_meta:import/2,3` or `otpcl_meta:use/2,3`) an environment
in which scripts run.

The upside, however, is that - as long as you use
`otpcl_env:stringy_state/1` as your starting state and take care to
avoid `import`ing/`use`ing any commands/functions that are able to
break out of stringiness or dynamically create atoms - you should be
safe to interpret even adversarial scripts, and you can rest easy
knowing that OTPCL won't do any type-related funny business.  Going
forward, I'm making it a point to maximize the number of OTPCL
commands in the standard library (or what passes for one, at least)
that work with stringy interpreters - that is, being lenient on
whether passed-in arguments are strings or atoms/integers/floats (and
converting as necessary, with appropriate warnings in the docs if said
conversion entails dynamic atom creation or anything else that might
make adversarial inputs unsafe to interpret).

## Defining OTPCL commands works differently now?

In OTPCL 0.2.0 (and earlier), if you wanted to create an Erlang module
that exported OTPCL commands, you would do something like this:

```erlang
-module(foo).
-export([bar/2]).
-otpcl_cmds([bar]).

bar([], State) ->
    {baz, State}.
```

And then we'd be able to call it from OTPCL:

```tcl
use foo
foo bar  # returns baz
# Alternately...
import foo
bar      # also returns baz
```

That `-otpcl_cmds([bar]).` is a bit cumbersome, though, since it means
having to maintain two separate lists of exports (one for Erlang, one
for OTPCL).  That's more things to think about and more things to mess
up.

This is even worse if you're doing this in Elixir, since Elixir
doesn't persist module attributes by default; you have to register
that `otpcl_cmds` attribute and specify that it should be persisted,
which means yet more boilerplate:

```elixir
defmodule Foo do
  Module.register_attribute(__MODULE__, :otpcl_cmds, persist: true)
  @otpcl_cmds [:bar]

  def bar([], state), do: {:baz, state}
end
```

...yuck!

OTPCL 0.3.0 overhauls this a fair bit by instead using prefixes on
function names to denote whether something is an OTPCL command.  The
0.3.0 version of the above Erlang module:

```erlang
-module(foo).
-export('CMD_bar'/2).

'CMD_bar'([], State) ->
    {baz, State}.
```

And in Elixir:

```elixir
defmodule Foo do
  def unquote(:"CMD_bar")([], state), do: {:baz, state}
end
```

...okay so for the Elixir version we trade some ugliness for some
different (but IMO less severe) ugliness, but the Erlang version is
much nicer, no?  This approach has quite a bit of precedent, too;
EUnit, for example, uses the `_test` suffix to know which exported
functions in a module are tests, and Elixir macros are actually
ordinary Erlang functions with a `MACRO-` prefix.

**But wait, there's more!**  If OTPCL sees an exported function
*without* a prefix, it'll turn that into a command, too -
specifically, a "pure" command, i.e. one which doesn't alter state.
We could rewrite that Erlang module like so:

```erlang
-module(foo).
-export(bar/0).

bar() ->
    baz.
```

Or that Elixir module like so:

```elixir
defmodule Foo do
  def bar(), do: :baz
end
```

And those will still work exactly the same way from OTPCL's perspective:

```tcl
use foo; foo bar  # still returns baz
import foo; bar   # also still returns baz
```

All this because OTPCL's `use` and `import` commands are now smart
enough to differentiate between "hey, this 2-arity function has a
`CMD_` prefix, so this is probably an OTPCL command and I should have
the interpreter pass its state into its second argument and expect to
get back a new state in the returned tuple's second member" v. "hey,
this function doesn't have a prefix so it's probably an ordinary pure
function and therefore the interpreter can just call it and set the
result as `$RETVAL`", and that smartness is all thanks to this new
method of defining OTPCL commands in Erlang modules.

**But wait, there's more!**  Because of this new approach of prefixing
commands instead of separately listing them in a custom attribute,
it's now possible to expose Erlang and OTPCL APIs for the same module.
Before, that required either exposing OTPCL-isms to your module's
users or else doing a bunch of funky conversions to/from OTPCL's
list + state calling convention; now, you just define
`some_function/N` and `'CMD_some_function'/2` and you're all set.
OTPCL's own code heavily exploits this to make as much of OTPCL as
usable as possible from both the host language and OTPCL itself.

This *is* (obviously) a breaking change, though.  I did not retain any
code to support the old way of defining OTPCL-command-exporting
modules, so if you've been using OTPCL already (despite it being
nowhere near production ready) you'll need to migrate over to the new
approach.

## Other stuff

Test coverage is vastly improved now.  Having comprehensive tests was
kinda mandatory for such a large overhaul, and it helped with tracking
what was converted to the prefixed command approach v. what was still
on the module attribute approach.

I also removed `otpcl_shell` for the time being.  I figure in the
short term it's easy enough to pull in the Erlang functions for which
that module's functions were thin wrappers around (and in the long
term, an `otpcl_shell` module that actually made OTPCL suitable as a
system shell replacement would look very different from such a module
of thin wrappers).  Besides, having to write tests for something as
finicky to test as operating system interactions struck me as not
worth the effort at the moment.
